# Node DB3 Project Starter Code

<!-- Changed for git initial commit -->

## Instructions

### Task 1: Project Setup

There are two possible ways to submit your project. Your instructor should have communicated which method to use for this project during the Guided Project and in your cohort's Slack channel. If you are still unsure, reach out to Lambda Staff.

#### Option A - Codegrade

- [ ] Fork and clone the repository.
- [ ] Open the assignment in Canvas and click on the "Set up git" option.
- [ ] Follow instructions to set up Codegrade's Webhook and Deploy Key.
- [ ] Push your first commit: `git commit --allow-empty -m "first commit" && git push`.
- [ ] Check to see that Codegrade has accepted your git submission.

#### Option B - Pull Request

- [ ] Fork and clone the repository.
- [ ] Implement your project in a `firstname-lastname` branch.
- [ ] Create a pull request of `firstname-lastname` against your `main` branch.
- [ ] Open the assignment in Canvas and submit your pull request.

### Task 2: Minimum Viable Product

For this project you will:

- write **SQL statements** against the `northwind.db3` database.
- write the **middleware functions** for the schemes router in `api/schemes/scheme-middleware.js`.
- write the **db helper functions** for the schemes resource in `api/schemes/scheme-model.js`.

### Multi Table Queries

Use a graphical tool like `SQLite Studio` to open `./data/northwind.db3` and execute the following queries:

(Write the queries inside `./queries.sql` under the corresponding comment)

- Display the ProductName and CategoryName for all products in the database. Returns 77 records.
- Display the order Id and shipper CompanyName for all orders placed before August 9 2012. Returns 429 records.
- Display the name and quantity of the products ordered in order with Id 10251. Sort by ProductName. Returns 3 records.
- Display the OrderID, customer's Company Name and the employee's Last Name for every order. All columns should be labeled clearly. Returns 16,789 records.

### Middleware Functions

Write middleware functions in `api/schemes/scheme-middleware.js` following the instructions inside that file:

- [ ] `checkSchemeId`
- [ ] `validateScheme`
- [ ] `validateStep`

### Database Functions

Write db access functions in `api/schemes/scheme-model.js` following the instructions inside that file:

- [ ] `find`
- [ ] `findById`
- [ ] `findSteps`
- [ ] `add`
- [ ] `addStep`

#### Schemes Schema

| field       | data type        | metadata                                      |
| :---------- | :--------------- | :-------------------------------------------- |
| scheme_id   | unsigned integer | primary key, auto-increments, generated by db |
| scheme_name | string           | required, unique                              |

#### Steps Schema

| field        | data type        | metadata                                           |
| :----------- | :--------------- | :------------------------------------------------- |
| step_id      | unsigned integer | primary key, auto-increments, generated by db      |
| scheme_id    | unsigned integer | foreign key referencing scheme.scheme_id, required |
| step_number  | unsigned integer | required                                           |
| instructions | string           | required                                           |

#### API

Open `api/schemes/scheme-router.js` and study the specification for each endpoint.

You do not need to make any changes to this file.

- `[GET] /api/schemes`
- `[GET] /api/schemes/:scheme_id`
- `[GET] /api/schemes/:scheme_id/steps`
- `[POST] /api/schemes`
- `[POST] /api/schemes/:scheme_id/steps`

#### Notes

- Run tests locally executing `npm test`.
- Reset the data in the `data/schemes.db3` database executing `npm run seed`.
- You are welcome to create additional files but **do not move or rename existing files** or folders.
- Do not alter your `package.json` file except to install additional libraries or add additional scripts.
- In your solution, it is essential that you follow best practices and produce clean and professional results.
- Schedule time to review, refine, and assess your work.
- Perform basic professional polishing including spell-checking and grammar-checking on your work.

### Task 3: Stretch Problems

In [SQL Try Editor at W3Schools.com](https://www.w3schools.com/Sql/tryit.asp?filename=trysql_select_top):

- Find the number of shipments by each shipper.

        SELECT o.shipperid, shippers.ShipperName, count(o.shipperid) Shipments
        FROM orders o
        join shippers on o.shipperid=shippers.shipperid
        group by o.shipperid

- Find the top 5 best performing employees measured in number of orders.

        SELECT o.orderid, o.employeeid, (e.firstname || ' ' || e.lastname) name,
        count(o.orderid ) orders FROM orders o
        join employees e on o.employeeid=e.employeeid
        join orderdetails od on o.orderid=od.orderid
        join products p on od.productid=p.productid
        group by o.employeeid
        order by orders desc
        limit 5;

- Find the top 5 best performing employees measured in revenue.

        SELECT o.orderid, o.employeeid, (e.firstname || ' ' || e.lastname) name, p.price, od.quantity,
        sum(p.price*od.quantity ) total_rev FROM orders o
        join employees e on o.employeeid=e.employeeid
        join orderdetails od on o.orderid=od.orderid
        join products p on od.productid=p.productid
        group by o.employeeid
        order by total_rev desc
        limit 5;

- Find the category that brings in the least revenue.

        SELECT o.orderid, p.productid, p.categoryid, od.quantity, p.price, c.categoryname, sum(od.quantity*p.price) total FROM orders o
        join orderdetails od on o.orderid=od.orderid
        join products p on od.productid=p.productid
        join categories c on p.categoryid=c.categoryid
        group by c.categoryid
        order by total asc
        limit 1;

- Find the customer country with the most orders.

        SELECT o.*, c.country, count(o.orderid) total_orders FROM orders o
        join orderdetails od on o.orderid=od.orderid
        join products p on od.productid=p.productid
        join customers c on o.customerid=c.customerid
        group by c.country
        order by total_orders desc
        limit 1;

- Find the shipper that moves the most cheese measured in units.

        SELECT o.orderid, o.shipperid, od.quantity, c.categoryid, c.description, count(od.quantity) total FROM orders o
        join orderdetails od on o.orderid=od.orderid
        join products p on od.productid=p.productid
        join categories c on p.categoryid = c.categoryid
        where c.categoryid=4
        group by shipperid
        order by total desc
